---
title: Setting up a Samba SMB server with Docker on CentOS 7 Linux
slug: samba-docker-centos7
date: 2019-09-08
layout: blog-post.njk
---

Docker containers are an awesome technology which can greatly help in creating reproducible setups for software insallations. Today we are taking a look at how to use Docker and Docker Compose to run a file sharing server on a NAS machine.

Our host will be running CentOS 7, but you can adapt this to any distribution of Linux with a recent enough kernel capable of running Docker and Docker Compose. We will need to run a few commands to install the required packages, you can skip ahead if you already have Docker and Docker Compose installed and working.

## Installing Docker on CentOS 7

First of all we need to install yum-utils which provides the yum-config-manager command and two other dependencies for the devicemapper storage driver.

```
yum install -y yum-utils device-mapper-persistent-data lvm2
```

Then, we use yum-config-manager to add the docker repo for CentOS 7.

```
yum-config-manager --add-repo https://download.docker.com/linux/centos/docker-ce.repo
```

After we have added the repo we can install docker and the containerd runtime using the following command.

```
yum install docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io -y
```

Docker Compose is installed thru pip, so we need to add the epel repo and install it if we haven't already.

```
wget https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-7.noarch.rpm
rpm -ivh epel-release-latest-7.noarch.rpm
yum install python-pip -y
```

Granted we have pip installed, we can use it to install Docker Compose

```
pip install --upgrade docker-compose
```

Finally, we will not forget to start the Docker service and enable it on system boot.

```
systemctl start docker
systemctl enable docker
```

## Setting up the Samba container

Now that we have Docker installed and running we can start creating our Dockerfile and docker-compose.yml files for the Samba container. I like to put these in a git repository so the first thing I would do is create a new folder, cd to it and run `git init .`.

We will create data folder for the actual file share.

```
mkdir -p data
```

On CentOS 7 we need to add the correct selinux permissions to let us mount the folder as a volume inside our container.

```
chcon -R -t svirt_sandbox_file_t data
```

Our file share wouldn't be very useful if it wasn't writable so we will change the gid/uid of the folder to 3000. We can then use this uid when creating the user in our Dockerfile.

```
chown -R 3000:3000 data
```

Our samba server needs a config file so we will create an smb.conf file with a sane set of defaults. Notice that we define a file share called "Share" with a path set to /share. When creating this file, make sure to end it with a newline, as all text files should end with a newline to follow UNIX conventions.

```
[global]
  workgroup = WORKGROUP
  server string = %h server (Samba, Alpine)
  security = user
  map to guest = Bad User
  encrypt passwords = yes
  load printers = no
  printing = bsd
  printcap name = /dev/null
  disable spoolss = yes
  disable netbios = yes
  server role = standalone
  server services = -dns, -nbt
  smb ports = 445
  ;name resolve order = hosts
  ;log level = 3

[Share]
  path = /share
  comment = Share
  browseable = yes
  writable = yes
```

## The Dockerfile

We can now start creating our Dockerfile and I will go through it line by line, explaining each one. First of all we use the Alpine Linux image version 3.9 as the base. I like Alpine for containers since it cuts out unecessary bloat and uses the leaner musl libc implementation.

```
FROM alpine:3.9
```

We will add the Samba server packages using apk, the Alpine package manager.

```
RUN apk add --no-cache samba-client samba-server samba-common-tools
```

We copy the smb.conf file we created into the container at the appropriate path.

```
COPY smb.conf /etc/samba/smb.conf
```

Since I want to access the file share with a username and password, I will set them as environment variables and we will read those at the time of container creation.

```
ARG SAMBA_USER
ARG SAMBA_PASS
```

We then use those environment variables to create a user with uid=3000 and allow that user access to the file share.

```
RUN adduser -s /sbin/nologin -h /home/samba -H -u 3000 -D "$SAMBA_USER"
RUN (echo "$SAMBA_PASS"; echo "$SAMBA_PASS") | smbpasswd -a -s "$SAMBA_USER"
RUN echo "  valid users = $SAMBA_USER" >> /etc/samba/smb.conf
```

We will expose the SMB port which is 445 TCP.

```
EXPOSE 445/tcp
```

Finally, we run the Samba daemon in foreground mode with logging to stdout. I found that the --no-process-group argument was required to get it to run correctly.

```
CMD ["smbd", "--foreground", "--log-stdout", "--no-process-group"]
```

Now that we have the entire Dockerfile, here it is again:

```
FROM alpine:3.9

RUN apk add --no-cache samba-client samba-server samba-common-tools

COPY smb.conf /etc/samba/smb.conf

ARG SAMBA_USER
ARG SAMBA_PASS

RUN adduser -s /sbin/nologin -h /home/samba -H -u 3000 -D "$SAMBA_USER"
RUN (echo "$SAMBA_PASS"; echo "$SAMBA_PASS") | smbpasswd -a -s "$SAMBA_USER"
RUN echo "  valid users = $SAMBA_USER" >> /etc/samba/smb.conf

EXPOSE 445/tcp

CMD ["smbd", "--foreground", "--log-stdout", "--no-process-group"]
```

After you are done, do not forget to add the data/ folder to your .dockerignore file.

## Docker Compose

To help in easily creating our container we will use this docker-compose.yml file:

```
version: '3'
services:
  samba:
    build: 
      context: .
      args:
        - SAMBA_USER
        - SAMBA_PASS
    restart: always
    ports:
      - "445:445"
    volumes:
      - ./data:/share
```

Thanks to Docker Compose, we could just run `SAMBA_USER=user SAMBA_PASS=pass docker-compose build` and `docker-compose up -d` to start our Samba server, with the environment variables changed as you would like. The big advantage of running it this way is that we have all the configuration ready to go, preferably in a git repo and we just need to clone the repo and run the commands in the previous sentence to set up the server exactly the same way on a different host.
